Namami Gange Programme
Namami Gange Programme is an integrated river management initiative, approved as a Major Programme by the Union Government of India in June 2014 with a budget of ₹22,500 million from 2023–26 to address pollution, conservation, and rejuvenation of the National River Ganga.[1] It aims to engage with the community and connect various interest groups including scientists, technology companies, investors, and community members.[2] NMCG (National Mission For Clean Ganga) has declared Chacha Chaudhary, a well-known Indian comic book character, as the mascot of the Namami Gange Programme, according to a statement issued by the Ministry of Jal Shakti.[3] Under the Namami Gange Programme, all drains falling into the Saryu River in Ayodhya are intercepted and wastewater is being transported to a sewage treatment plant.[4] The research division of Namami Gange is led by CGanga, established under IIT Kanpur.

A Clean Ganga roadshow, inaugurated on the sidelines of COP26 in Glasgow, contributed to the formation of four chapters in Scotland, Wales, the Midlands, and London to connect various interest groups with the Namami Gange Programme.[5] Over 30,000 seeds of economically important fish species, which are declining in the Ganges, such as Catla, Rohu, and Mrigal fishes, were released at the confluence of the Ganges and the Yamuna in Prayagraj Sangam.[6] Data from the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) indicates that out of 341 projects, 147 (43%) have been completed, with a majority of these projects related to sewage infrastructure. 61 out of 157 sewage projects (39%) have been completed.[7] During the flag-off of the MV Ganga Vilas cruise, Prime Minister Narendra Modi stated, “Ganga ji is not just a river, and we are taking a twin approach through Namami Gange and Arth Ganga to serve this important water resource.”[8]

The efforts towards conservation of the Ganges River and restoration of its ecology have been recognized by UNESCO, which included the National Mission for Clean Ganga, led by the Indian government, in the world's several global campaigns recognized for contributions to ecological restoration.
Restoring the Ganga’s purity and biodiversity
The ‘Namami Gange’ project’s holistic approach brings together public policy, technology intervention and community participation
Ganga Connect concludes in London after high level of engagement, tangible outcomes
Read more At: 
https://www.aninews.in/news/world/asia/ganga-connect-concludes-in-london-after-high-level-of-engagement-tangible-outcomes20211129192955/
Centre’s Namami Gange Programme helps revive key rivers in UP
Rivers in Uttar Pradesh are now on the way to becoming cleaner, with the state government implementing the Centre’s Namami Gange project with full zeal.

The Ganga in Kanpur and Varanasi, the Saryu in Ayodhya, and the Yamuna in Vrindavan are on their way to becoming pollution-free under the Yogi Adityanath-led Government of Uttar Pradesh. The drains falling into these rivers have been tapped and the water of the drains connecting to the Sewage Treatment Plants (STP) is being treated and purified.
As many as 37 drains of these major cities have been prevented from falling into the river. New STPs have been formed on their banks and the sewage of the drains is being purified by tapping. In the last one year, a total of 72 drains have been tapped.

A new STP of 50 Million Litres Daily (MLD) has been prepared in Ramna at a cost of Rs 161.31 crores and three drains falling into the River Ganga have been tapped.

In order to make the river Yamuna in Vrindavan pollution-free, the government has completed the renovation and upgradation of four MLD STPs along with tapping of five drains at a cost of Rs 42.82 crores under the Namami Gange Programme. With the efforts of the government, the water quality of the rivers has also improved a lot.

Anurag Srivastava, Principal Secretary, Namami Gange, and Rural Water Supply Department said, “A campaign is being run on a war footing to make the rivers pollution-free. In particular, the big metropolis from where major rivers like Ganga, Yamuna, and Saryu pass. Along with tapping the drains there, new STPs are being started. Three-tier monitoring is being done for every plan and every work related to the cleanliness of rivers.”

Under the Namami Gange Programme, all the drains falling into the river Saryu in the religious and mythological city of Ayodhya are being tapped and contaminated water is being transported to the sewerage treatment plant. This has improved the water quality of the Saryu in Ayodhya. Here, at a cost of Rs 37.67 crores, work has been done to tap five drains. Along with this, the construction work of 12 MLD STP has also been completed.

Also Read: UP Govt establishes 104 STPs for cleaning major rivers under Namami Gange

In Bithoor, seven drains have been tapped at a cost of Rs 13.40 crores. The sewage water is being treated at STP and purified. Due to this, the streams of the river have become uninterrupted and pure.

Under the Namami Gange programme, work has also been done on the sewerage scheme at a rapid pace. The work of laying 106.67 km of sewer lines has been completed with a sewerage plan of Rs 430.49 crores. Along with this, 10350 sewer house connections have been made and the work of desilting 182 km length in river Ganga has been completed.

Clean Ganga roadshow gets enthusiastic
response from investors, universities in Britain
TNN | Nov 28, 2021, 06.53 AM IST
Printed from
An outreach exhibition to seek investment and collaboration in
the cleaning and rejuvenation of the Ganga and showcase the
work on it to date has sparked a huge level of interest from
investors, scientists, universities, and technology companies in
Britain.
The exhibition was inaugurated on the sidelines of COP26 in
Glasgow and has been travelling around different cities in the UK.
The Indian government has provided $4 billion towards the
rejuvenation of the Ganga but estimates are that $100 billion will
be required over 15 years. So far 347 projects have been
commissioned, which will be completed in 2022 or 2023.
”In 2014 the government of India took up the challenge of
cleaning and rejuvenating the 2,500km river, upon which 50 crore people are dependant. We have learnt some
major lessons from the river Thames and other rivers with regards to cleaning methods and we want to connect
with the international community and the diaspora to seek their help and expertise to take this project forward,”
Rozy Agarwal, executive director, finance, of National Mission for Clean Ganga, said.
Forthcoming initiatives include converting all the biodegradable waste from the river into biogas. India has the
potential to generate 310 to 655 billion cubic metres of biogas a year by 2040, which is 36% of India’s current
energy supply.
There are also plans to convert municipal solid waste, sewage gas, and sludge from waste-water treatment plants
6/15/25, 1:08 PM Clean Ganga roadshow gets enthusiastic response from investors, universities in Britain - Times of India
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/uk/clean-ganga-roadshow-gets-enthusiastic-response-from-investors-universities-in-britain/articleshowprint/87956568.cms 1/3
across the Gangetic belt into hydrogen. One tonne of solid waste has the capacity to generate 100 kilos of
hydrogen. This will help India reach its net zero target by 2070.
Industrial and household waste can be traded on waste trading platforms. For example, waste-water can be
traded for industrial use and dried and dis-infected biosolids from sewage could be reused by farmers as manure.
As a result of the roadshow, four chapters have now been formed in Scotland, Wales, Midlands, and London to
connect various interest groups with the Namami Gange programme.
A Scotland-India water partnership has been announced to facilitate Scottish entities specializing in water
entering the Indian market. Scientists and academics from a string of British universities agreed to create a
knowledge pool for exchange of ideas and projects with UK universities to improve the livelihoods of people living
around the Ganga.
The Indian government is inviting investors globally to build and run sewage treatment plants, as untreated
sewage is one of the holy river's main pollutants. A total of 250 sewage plants must be built across the Ganga and
its tributaries. So far there are 158.
One British company, one of 14 British innovations in the Namami Gange programme, has come forward to offer
a floating water treatment system. These companies have also received investment commitment from investors
to scale up their solutions around the world.
Roundtables were held with finance leaders which led to the establishment of a Ganga finance and investments
forum, which will develop state of the art financial instruments such as high impact blue bonds as well as
channel investments from around the world into the programme.
A Global Youth for Ganga encouraging youth from India and other countries to exchange ideas was set up, as
was a UK based charity that resident diaspora and other individuals can donate to.
6/15/25, 1:08 PM Clean Ganga roadshow gets enthusiastic response from investors, universities in Britain - Times of India
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/uk/clean-ganga-roadshow-gets-enthusiastic-response-from-investors-universities-in-britain/articleshowprint/87956568.cms 2/3
“Communities are the most important assets for our battle against climate change and environmental issues,”
Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Union minister of Jal Shakti, said.
Dr Vinod Tare, founding head of cGanga, a think-tank set up by the ministry of Jal Shakti, said: “There are
problems globally about river pollution. It is not unique to India. We can share our experiences and knowledge
with each other and to that effect the programme will twin Indian rivers with British rivers in the coming year.”

ICAR-CIFRI Released Fish Seeds in Prayagraj Sangam under Namami Gange Programme
On Monday, under the ranching programme organized by ICAR – Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI) over 30,000 seeds of India’s major carps which are declining in the entire Ganga River like – catla, rohu, and mrigal fishes were released on the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna in Prayagraj Sangam.
On Monday, under the ranching programme organized by ICAR – Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI) over 30,000 seeds of India’s major carps which are declining in the entire Ganga River like – catla, rohu, and mrigal fishes were released on the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna in Prayagraj Sangam.  

This was done to conserve fish species that are becoming extinct in the Ganga River. This ranching programme is a part of the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) project, also known as the ‘Namami Gange Programme’. 

At the event, DN Jha, the center head of the CIFRI welcomed and educated the people about the river Ganga. Alongside him was Basant Kumar Das, the director, and guest of the institute, who informed the people about the significance of the ‘Namami Gange Project’ under which the seeds of important fish species were released, also about the biodiversity and cleanliness of the Ganga River. As the Chief Guest, Joykrushna Jena was present at the event, who is the deputy director-general (fisheries), Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. He explained the importance of fishing and ranching in the Ganga River and described different ways to increase the livelihood of fishermen and also distributed 20 cast nets among them.  

Convener of Ganga Vichar Manch and National Mission for Clean Ganga, Rajesh Sharma administered oath to all to keep Ganga clean. The pilgrims, fishermen, and regular visitors present at Sangam also participated in the programme. 

Namami Gange Programme is an Integrated Conservation Mission, which is approved as a ‘Flagship Programme’ by the Central Government in June 2014. The programme was launched to accomplish the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution and conservation and rejuvenation of the National River Ganga. 

It is being operated under the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal Shakti, and being implemented by the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), and its state counterpart organizations, i.e. State Program Management Groups (SPMGs). The programme has Rs 20,000 crores of centrally-funded, non-lapsable corpus and consists of nearly 288 projects.  
Main pillars of the programme are: 
Sewage Treatment Infrastructure

River-Front Development

River-Surface Cleaning

Biodiversity

Afforestation

Public Awareness

Industrial Effluent Monitoring

Ganga Gram 

First published on: 16 Nov 2021, 13:04 IST

Economy
River pollution. 147 projects under Namami Gange completed
Of the ₹29,972 cr sanctioned, ₹11,025 cr has been used to complete various projects
Cleaning the Ganga and rejuvenating it was one of the foremost projects of the Modi government in 2014. In the seven years since then, the data available with the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) show that out of 341 projects, 147 (or 43 per cent) are completed. A majority of projects are related to sewage infrastructure and 61 out of 157 sewage projects (39 per cent) have been completed so far.

Namami Gange is an integrated conservation and rejuvenation programme initiated by the Central government in June 2014. The programme aims to ensure effective abatement of pollution and conservation of the river Ganga by adopting a comprehensive river basin approach.

