          National Mission for Clean Ganga
                       Ministry of Jal Shakti
       Department of Water Resources, River Development &
            Ganga Rejuvenation, Government of India




Environmental and Social Management Framework
                             (ESMF)




                             Prepared by
           The Energy and Resources Institute (January 2011)


                             Updated by
          Lea Associates South Asia Pvt. Ltd.(November 2019)
                                                            CONTENTS
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 1
1.1             Background .............................................................................................................................. 1
1.2             National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) ............................................................................. 1
1.3             Brief Project Description .......................................................................................................... 2
1.4             Portfolio of Projects: NGRBP.................................................................................................... 2
1.5             Key Achievements under Namami Gange Programme ........................................................... 3
1.6             Identified Thurst Areas and Action Points under Namami Gange........................................... 3
1.7             Environmental and Social Analysis (ESA) and Management Framework (ESMF).................... 3
1.8             Objectives of ESMF: ................................................................................................................. 4
1.9             Laws and Regulatory Framework............................................................................................. 4
1.10            Environmental and Social Baseline .......................................................................................... 5
1.11            Identification of potential Environmental and Social Impacts and Mitigation Measures ....... 6
1.12            Procedure for Environmental & Social Management .............................................................. 7
1.13            Environment and Social Assessment for DBOT/Retro financing Projects: .............................. 8
1.14            Environment and Social Assessment for the HAM based PPP Projects: ................................. 8
1.15            Institutional arrangement & Mechanism of ESMF &Audit Implementation ........................... 9
1.16            Consultation functionaries as per Audit findings..................................................................... 9




                                                                                                                                                          i
                                 Glossary of Terms

Bigha                               1/5 of an acre
Development Block                   A number of villages grouped together form a Development
                                    Block.

District Collector/ Magistrate      Administrative head of a District.
Divisional Commissioner             Administrative head of a division comprising of a number of
                                    Districts.

Grievance Redressal Cell            A cell set up for grievance redressal by the competent
                                    authority at various levels

Hectare                             A unit for measuring land area. (10,000 m2).
Kachha                              Structures with stone/ mud wall/ thatch roof
Non-titleholders                    Drawing economic benefits from a piece of land, but not the
                                    owner of the land

Panchayat                           Elected local self-governing body at village level.
Panchayat Samiti                    Local Self-governing body at Block level
Pucca                               Cement, bricks or concrete build structure
Sarpanch                            Elected Head/chief of a village level body.
Semi Pucca                          Structures with tiles/ thatch roof/ brick cement wall
Tehsil/ Subdivision                 A group of Blocks




                                                                                                  ii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1       BACKGROUND

River Ganga has significant economic, environmental and cultural value in India. Rising in the Himalayas
and flowing in to the Bay of Bengal, the river traverses a course of more than 2,500 km through the plains
of north and eastern India. The Ganga basin – which also extends into parts of Nepal, China and
Bangladesh – accounts for 26 per cent of India’s landmass, 30 per cent of its water resources and more
than 40 per cent of its population. The Ganga also serves as one of India’s holiest rivers whose cultural and
spiritual significance transcends the boundaries of the basin.

Despite its importance, extreme pollution pressures pose a great threat to the biodiversity and
environmental sustainability of the Ganga, with detrimental effects on both the quantity and quality of its
flows. Increasing population in the basin and haphazard urbanization and industrial growth has significantly
impacted the water quality of River Ganga, particularly during the dry season.

The previous attempt to clean the river, such as Ganga Action Plan (GAP) launched in 1985 have provided
some gains in arresting rate of water quality degradation, but lot more needs to be done. The lessons
drawn from this prior experience indicate that improving water quality in the Ganga three-pronged
approach has been adopted as mentioned below:

 (i).    Establishing a basin-level, multi-sectoral framework for addressing pollution in the river (including
         national/state policies and river basin management institutions);
 (ii).   Making relevant institutions operational and effective (e.g. with the capacity to plan, implement and
         manage investments and enforce regulations); and,
(iii).   Implementing a phased program of prioritized infrastructure investments (with emphasis on sustainable
         operations and mobilization of community support)

As a major first step in this direction, the Government of India (GoI) has established the National Ganga
River Basin Authority (NGRBA) in 2009 and National Council for River Ganga (Rejuvenation, Protection and
Management) in 2016, as an Authority has been created for comprehensive management of the river. The
Namami Gange Programme launched in 2015 has adopted a river-basin approach and has been given a
multi- sectoral mandate to address both water quantity and quality aspects. Under Namami Gange
Programme, diverse set of interventions for cleaning and rejuvenation of river Ganga have been taken up.
These include pollution abatement activities including sewage, industrial effluent, Solid Waste etc., River
Front Management, Aviral Dhara, Rural Sanitation, Afforestation, Biodiversity Conservation, Public
Participation etc. The programme covers short term, medium term and long term activities.

The pace of these projects has gathered momentum and all efforts are being made to complete these
projects well within the respective timelines.

National Ganga River Basin Project (NGRBP) started in 2011 and funded by World Bank has now been
included as a part of Namami Gange Programme.

1.2       NATIONAL MISSION FOR CLEAN GANGA (NMCG)

The National Mission for Clean Ganga was established in the form of a national level Program Management
Group (PMG) in 2011, for seeking $1bn assistance from World Bank. Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) accorded approval on 28.04.2011 for the World bank assisted National Ganga River Basin
Project (NGRBP) at an estimated cost of Rs. 7000 crore to be implemented by NMCG as a registered Society

                                                      1
under the Societies Registration Act 1860, to act as an implementation arm of NGRBA (External Funding).

With change in Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 vide Gazette Notification dated 31.07.2014, the work
related to Ganga & its tributaries was transferred to Ministry of Water Resources, River Development &
Ganga Rejuvenation (Now Ministry of Jalshakti) from the Ministry of Environment & Forests. The next
major development in the evolution of NMCG was launch of Namami Gange Programme on 13th May 2015
with the approval of Cabinet as a Central Sector Scheme (100% central assistance), with components
including all objectives of NGRBA. The non-lapsable fund of Rs 20,000 crore was earmarked for five year
period, 2015-2020.

1.3          BRIEF PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The earlier NGRBP prgramme usually have 70% central share and 30% state share at the sub-projects levels
and support for 5 years of Operation and Maintenance. After launching of Namami Gange programme
almost all the new projects sanctioned under Namami Gange Programme would have 100% funding from
the Central Government for the entire life cycle cost of the assets created, which includes 15-year
Operation & Maintenance cost as well. Namami Gange Programme has been segregated into two different
components:

       Component A: Pertains to ongoing projects of cleaning of river Ganga & its tributaries, including World Bank
        Assisted NGRBP having remaining central liabilities.
       Component B: Pertains to new initiatives to be undertaken under National Ganga Plan in 5 major sectors i.e.
        Infrastructure Development (Sewage Treatment, River Front Development, and Industrial Waste Water
        Treatment & Solid Waste Management), Institutional Development, Ecological Sustainability, Research &
        Development and Communication & Public Outreach.



1.4          PORTFOLIO OF PROJECTS: NGRBP

The portfolio of river pollution mitigation projects to be implemented under the Namami Gange and its
components areas under.
S.No.                Portfolio of                                              Components
                       Projects
(i)            Sewerage and              Provision for an entirely new sewerage network including individual house connections
               Sanitation                 and gravity based interception and diversion arrangements to drains carrying sanitary
               Schemes                    sullage/dry weather flow
                                         Extensions to existing sewerage networks in some parts of cities/towns to include areas
                                          which are un-sewered hitherto or to newly developed areas in the recent years
(ii)           Sewage Treatment          Entirely new sewage treatment plant/facility
               Plants/Facility           Augmentation of capacities in existing sewage treatment plant/facility
                                         Remodeling/Renovation of existing sewage treatment facilities, resulting in better
                                          effluent quality and augmented treatment capacity
(iii)          Solid Waste               Engineered landfills with leachate collection and treatment systems
               Treatment                 Waste segregation and composting facilities
               Facilities

(iv)           Industrial Pollution      Common Industrial Effluent Treatment Plants(CETP’s)
               Control Facilities        Hazardous Waste Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility(TSDF’s)
                                         Other Industrial Effluent Treatment and disposal facility
(v)            River Front               River Front Development and beautification schemes of river banks
               Development               Construction of Bathing Ghats
               Schemes                   Redevelopment of Cremation grounds, situated on river banks
                                         Development of electric and or gas based crematoriums situated on river banks
The implementation of these projects is spread across several cities and/or towns within the Ganga basin
states/UT of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal.

                                                                2
1.5           KEY ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER NAMAMI GANGE PROGRAMME

Under Namami Gange programme, till December 2019, a total of 310 projects have been sanctioned at an
estimated cost of Rs. 28,909.59Crore, out of which 114 projects have been completed and made
operational; rest of the projects are at various stages of implementation.
These projects are related to: Sewerage Infrastructure, Ghat Entry Level activities, Institutional
development, project Implementation support/ research & study projects/ public relations and Public
Outreach, Biodiversity education, Construction of IHHL across Gram Panchayats near Ganga River,
Composite Ecological Task Force & Ganga Mitra, Bioremediation and Afforestation etc.

1.6           IDENTIFIED THURST AREAS AND ACTION POINTS UNDER NAMAMI GANGE

There are 7 identified thrust areas and 21 action points for the rejuvenation of Ganga and its tributaries, as below, the
details are given in the main report.
     Thrust Area 1-Aviral Dhara
     Thrust Area 2-Nirmal Dhara
     Thrust Area 3-Protection and Beautification of riverfront and development of Public amenities
     Thrust Area 4-Inter-ministerial Coordination, State’s participation and Capacity building
     Thrust Area 5-Research and Monitoring
     Thrust Area 6-Conservation of plants and aquatic species
     Thrust Area 7-People’s participation and Creating Awareness

The Ganga 1 projects were mostly on the main-stem of river Ganga which covered the 5 basin States i.e.
Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Uttarakhand. The Ganga 2 projects are in continuation to
the Ganga 1 projects and sub-project which are similar in nature. The focus of NMCG has also included
from Ganga main-stem to the polluted stretches of the tributaries of river Ganga. Thus, the need was felt
for updating the ESMF to showcase the inclusion of the tributaries, projects and sub-projects with respect
to Ganga 1 and Ganga 2.

Accordingly, the Volume 1 of the ESMF has been updated to provide an overview of the Ganga basin profile
including major tributaries like Ramganga, Kali, Yamuna (downstream of Delhi), Hindon, Gomti, Betwa,
Chambal, Parbati, Shipra, Sind, Tons, Son, Damodar, Ajay, BurhiGandak, Kiul, Kosi, Mahananda, Ken and
Ghagra. The Ganga basin covers 11 States i.e. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Delhi, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal.

1.7           ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ANALYSIS (ESA) AND MANAGEMENT
              FRAMEWORK (ESMF)

All potential projects and sub-projects planned under the NGRBP/Namami Gange programme may have
environmental and social impacts. Therefore, the purpose of developing the Environmental and Social
Management Frame Work (ESMF) was to facilitate the management of environmental and social issues of
all investment projects proposed by the NGRBA/Namami Gange at the very beginning of project planning
and implementation. The ESMF currently addresses the broader portfolio of projects1 to be implemented
under the Namami Gange along with its implementation methods like Hybrid Annuity Mode (HAM), DBOT,
Retroactive Financing etc. As specific project identification will operate as a demand-driven process and
also depends on many other factors like polluted river stretch etc., a single ESMF common to the NMCG,
SMCG and all other project implementing agencies is required so that project specific ESIA&ESMP or
ESDDRs are prepared based upon a common guideline. In this line the ESMF was updated depicting all the
various process of project implementation and revised land acquisition details in August 2017. This version
of the ESMF is now being updated considering the inclusion of tributaries; a basic profile of such tributaries
is already presented in Volume-I of ESMF.

1
    Portfolio of projects are discussed in detail in Chapter V
                                                                 3
1.8         OBJECTIVES OF ESMF:

The ESMF for Namami Gange project2has following objectives:
          Determine key social and environmental issues associated with River Ganga and possible activities that
           could be initiated by NGRBA, both at national as well as state level;
          Conduct an environmental and social impact assessment of the ‘no regret’ inves tments proposed to be
           supported by the project, identify potential environmental and social impacts associated with such
           investments and recommend measures to mitigate impacts;
          Carry out an analysis of various stakeholders associated with the project, identify their concerns with regard
           to environmental and social aspects, and recommend measures to mainstream these aspects into the
           project;
          Develop an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the project, to ensure that
           environmental and social issues are effectively addressed in project design and implementation.

1.9         LAWS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

                                                  Relevant National key Legislations
    Environment Protection Act, 1986
                                                            th
    Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)Notification 14 Sep’ 2006
    Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981
    Water Prevention and Control of Pollution Act, 1974
    The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000
    The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and Its Amendments
    The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980
    Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016
    Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016
    Coastal Regulation Zone(CRZ) Notification 2011 & amendments after
    Forest Right Act-2006, The Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Right) Act, 2006
    The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act , 1958
    Disaster Management Act, 2005
    The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010
    Public Liability and Insurance Act, 1991
    Explosive Act, 1984
    Minor Mineral and concession Rules
    The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019
    National Forest Policy, 1988
    The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and the Cess Act
     of 1996
    Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989 (the Rules govern handling, movement and disposal of hazardous
     waste);
    Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules 1989, amended 1994 and 2000 (the Rules provide indicative
     criteria for hazardous chemicals and require occupiers to identify major accident hazards and prepare on-site and off-site
     emergency plans).
    Right to fair compensation and transparency in land acquisition, rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013
    The Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act
                                                    Applicable World Bank Policies
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)- Umbrella Policy applicable for all infrastructural projects- Applicable in all Investment
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04)- to protect natural habitat including forest & wildlife areas- Applicable where Forest and Wild Life
     are impacted due to project
    Forestry (OP 4.36) – to protect the health and quality of forest, welfare and right of people dependent on forest resource and


2
    ‘Project’ comprises all the sub-projects sanctioned under NamamiGange
                                                                   4
    utilization of natural forests or plantations.
   Involuntary Resettlement (4.12)- to avoid minimize involuntary resettlement where feasible- Applicable in case of Private land
    Acquisition
   Indigenous people (OP 4.10)- to protect the dignity, right and cultural uniqueness of indigenous people- Applicable, where
    project site involves tribes, indigenous people are impacted or benefitted.


1.10       ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE

The Ganga basin encompasses an area of more than a million square kilometers (1,086,000 sq.km.) spread
over four countries: India, Nepal, Bangladesh and China. With 861,404 sq.km. Within India itself, the
Ganga basin is the largest river basin in India and covers approximately 26.3 per cent of India’s total
geographical area. The Ganga flows through the states of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand and West Bengal. The Ganga rises in the Garhwal
Himalaya (30o 55’N, 79o7’E) as the Bhagirathi. Throughout the course of the Ganga, from its source at
Gaumukh to its mouth at Sagar Island in Bay of Bengal, it is a common practice for Indians to take daily dips
in the holy waters of the Ganga, especially at places of pilgrimage like Rishikesh, Haridwar,
Garhmukteshwar, Kannauj, Allahabad, Mirzapur and Varanasi.

Based on stream characteristics, the entire 2,525 km course of the Ganga can be divided into the following
major five sections: (i) mountainous, (ii) upper plain, (iii) middle plain, (iv) deltaic non-tidal and (v) deltaic
tidal plain. In term of physiography, the Ganga basin falls entirely in three major i.e. 1) Northern
Mountains, (2) Great Plains (3) Central Highlands regions of India. Major soil type of the Ganga Basin is
alluvial soil 52% followed by red soil (11%). Climatically, the tropical and subtropical temperature zones are
most predominant in the entire Ganga basin. May is the hottest month in most part of the basin, while
January is coldest. The weather in the Ganga basin is characterized by a distinct wet season during the
period of south west monsoon (June to September). The Ganga basin, by virtue of its alluvial makeup, is
endowed with vast resources of ground water. The mean annual replenishable groundwater in India as a
whole has been assessed at 446.87 billion cumec per year, of which about 219.09 billion cumec per year
(49%) lies in the states of the Ganga basin. Land use of the Ganga basin is extensively cultivated,
constituting approximately more than 45 per cent of the total area of the India. With respect to forest
cover, Ganga basin has 17.53% of forest cover to its total geographical region; this is comparatively lesser
than country level (21%). This may be due to having major area occupied under Agriculture.

The detailed baseline profile of other tributaries are presented in Volume –I. Increasing population,
urbanization, industrialization, and the use of agricultural chemicals continue to pose a significant threat to
water quality in the Ganga basin today. The number of cities and towns in the Ganga basin has increased
from 1873 in 1991 to 1949 in 2001, while the urban population has increased from 88 million in 1991 to
128 million in 2001. As per census 2011, total 324 class I & class II cities are located in Ganga Basin.

The Ganga basin evidently demands treatment of sewage and minimum ecological flow for its survival as a
river. Since a river is a living eco-system and therefore ultimate goal should be to protect the functioning of
the river eco-system.
The Ganga basin is one of the most densely populated and fertile river basins in the world. The basin
supports about 600 million people over an area of approximately 860,000 sq. km of which some 100
million are directly dependent on the river and its tributaries.

For Ganga stem cities/town, projects have been taken up to create 3308 MLD sewage treatment capacity
against the generation of 2953 MLD (Year 2016). The sewage treatment capacity in Ganga main stem
towns have now increased from 1575 MLD (Year Dec 2016) to 1954 MLD (Sept 2019), excluding 410 MLD
                                                                5
sewage treatment through East Kolkata Wetland.

1.11          IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS AND
              MITIGATION MEASURES

Since the Project proposed under Namami Gange Scheme are pollution abatement project of River Basin.
Although few negative impact may also be encountered due to having project proposal on a fresh land,
located in busy city limit and catering city’ sanitation etc. Potential Impact and Mitigation measures
applicable for Namami Gange project has been detailed in Annexure IIA of the ESMF Guideline. However,
major impact with respect to Environment and Social is presented below
Type of Project     Potential major Impact
Sewerage               surface and groundwater contamination due to leakage and/or improper joints in sewers
Scheme                 severance of utilities and requirement for relocation due to sewer laying
                       disruption due to local traffic diversion and congestion during sewer laying works
                       impact on public/private properties and other sensitive receptors along the sewer alignment
                        during construction
                       disposal of excess excavated soil and construction debris
                       Exploitation of water sources for meeting construction water demand.
                       air and noise pollution from construction equipment’s
                       Health and safety concerns of workers, while laying or rehabilitating existing sewers.
Sewage               change in land use pattern, in case of proposed sewage treatment plants at new locations
Treatment Plants     change in channel hydraulics, triggering erosion and siltation problems, if sewage treatment
                        plants are proposed in flood plains
                       change in hydrology and drainage patterns due to the construction activity, particularly, if
                        sewage treatment facility is located in flood plains
                       health and safety issues associated with operation and maintenance of sewage treatment
                        facility, particularly exposure to methane and other noxious gases, sludge contaminated with
                        heavy metals etc.
                       issues associated with the disposal of sludge, if sewage is likely to be contaminated with
                        heavy metals due to mix of industrial waste with sewage
                       Emission of methane, if not utilized for power generation or any other gainful applications.
                       water logging problems due to improper/ inadequate disposal of treated effluent or effluent
                        not conforming to stipulated discharge standards during operation
                       Sludge from a waste treatment plant may constitute a hazardous and nonhazardous waste.
Industrial         Pollution of water resources
Pollution Control  Soil contamination due to the disposal of untreated / partially treated effluents and / or
                        hazardous wastes
Initiatives
                     air quality, odour and fly nuisance due to the improper operation of treatment facilities
                     health impacts on the neighboring communities
                     Issues of leachate and loss of productivity to agriculture lands due to the disposal of sludge
                        from the facilities.
Solid     Waste      surface and ground water contamination due to unmanaged leachate collection and disposal
Management           change in channel hydraulics, triggering erosion and siltation problems, if solid waste
                        management facility is proposed in flood plains
Investments
                       change in hydrology and drainage pattern, if the facility is located in flood plains
                       air quality, odour and fly nuisance due to the improper operation of waste disposal or
                        processing facilities
                       issues pertaining to siting of facility such as change in land use pattern, proximity to
                        settlements, cultural properties and any other sensitive receptors
                       air and noise pollution from construction equipment’s
                                                         6
Type of Project     Potential major Impact
                     Health and safety issues associated with operation and maintenance of solid waste
                        treatment facility, particularly of workers manually handling wastes.
River       Front    change in land use, and drainage pattern
Management           change in channel hydraulics, triggering \erosion and siltation problems either at in situ or
                        elsewhere along the course of river
Investments
                       impact due to inadequate solid and liquid waste disposal arrangements
                       impact due to inadequate sanitation, health and safety facilities
                       impact on river water quality due to proposed amenities
                       impact on environmental aesthetics and cultural value
Major      Social      Direct purchase of small land parcels for SPS/ Lifting station
Impact applicable      Land acquisition / taking for sewerage treatment plant leading to loss of livelihood /
                        displacement of non-titleholders / titleholders
for all kind of
project
                       Temporary land taking causing inconvenience to local community
                       Temporary loss of common grazing area

Mitigation Measure: Mitigation measure applicable during planning -designing phase, construction phase
and operational phase has been presented in annexure II & III of ESMF for Sewerage scheme and STP
projects. Few insights of major points are described below, which is applicable for all STP, Sewerage and
River Front Development projects:

 Regulatory Compliance: Obtain necessary approval with respect to project as per regulatory compliance
 Flood Risk Management: The Design Consultants should design for bypass arrangements, to discharge untreated
    sewage.
   Landscape: Undertake Landscape afforestation in nearby areas this will also to cater the issue of Odor, Noise.
   Treated Waste Water: The treated water quality shall comply with the standards laid down by the state pollution
    control board for disposal onto the land, water body or for irrigation use.
   Sludge: Providing adequate and safe sludge disposal facilities, Digested Sludge from a waste treatment plant may
    constitute a hazardous and nonhazardous waste, therefore periodic testing of Sludge to assess the content of
    hazardous chemical should be identified (as per CPHEEO manual 2016) before it final disposal at the identified
    dumping site of MC. Dumping shall be done when the authorized land fill site is not available nearby to project
    region.
   Location: Careful planning and design of STP with adequate buffer zones. Future growth of the surrounding areas
    shall be considered. Select appropriate location away from sensitive locations such as schools and hospitals
   Other Air, water, Noise, Soil Pollution control measure during construction stage (presented in Sample EMP).
   Health and Safety: During construction stage, assurance of safe work environment and incident free execution of
    the project, health and safety of worker as well as overall project is significant in the Namami Gange projects. As
    per relevant Factory Act 1948 & The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and
    Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, concessionaire has to be ensured all related measures reflected in the Site
    specific ESMP of the projects and will be part of Bid documents.

1.12     PROCEDURE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL MANAGEMENT

The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is an integral part of the Namami Gange
Programme framework document. The ESMF is aligned with the Environment and Social safeguard policies
of World Bank and the concerned rules and regulations of Government of India. This would be used as an
umbrella guideline by the Namami Gange program (the NMCG and SMCGs) while preparing and/ or
appraising, approving and executing the investments.




                                                          7
1.13      ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT FOR DBOT/RETRO FINANCING
          PROJECTS:

As per ESMF guideline each project is scrutinized as to its type, location, scale, and sensitivity and the
magnitude of its potential environmental impacts (Screening Checklist), based on outcome of screening
analysis, proposed investment shall be categorized as High and Low category. Therefore, as per ESMF, the
sub-projects are categorized into (i) High Impact and (ii) Low Impact category, in which, for High Category
Project, a detailed Environment and Social Assessment and Management Plan (ESAMP) has been carried
out preferably by a separate consultant apart from the DPR consultant. Sub Projects which are financing
retroactively, a due diligence study to analyse the Environmental and Social issues are required to be
carried out by a separate consultant apart from the DPR consultant. The procedures for implementation of
ESMF in these types of projects are summarized in above flow chart. The approved ESAMP will form part of
the bidding document. After the award of work the selected contractor may need to update the ESAMP
based upon the detailed design of the project and shall prepare a site specific ESAMP.




1.14      ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT FOR THE HAM BASED PPP PROJECTS:

The agreed action for Environment and Social assessment of projects under HAM projects include:

  ESDDR along with Environment and Social Management Action Plan (ESMAP) will be prepared at the
       DPR stage;

  The ESDDR will cover the basis nature of the projects, a very brief description of the environment and
       present status along with screening checklist and an analysis of environmental and social issues
       associated with the project.

  The ESDDR to describe the future action plan to be taken during the detailed design stage by the
       Hybrid annuity operator/Concessionaire like:
       o Various regulatory clearances (e.g. environmental clearance, forest clearance, NOC etc. as

                                                    8
         applicable)
       o Preparation of Environmental and Social Assessment(ESA)/EIA
       o Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), as applicable
       o other actions, and management measures to be implemented by the Concessionaire

ESDDR can become part of the bidding document. The public consultation and disclosure process will
continue during project implementation. The draft EIA/EMP/RAP etc. for the specific sub-projects will be
discussed with the affected communities and the final documents will be placed on the websites of the
NMCG and the SMCGs. The copies of the EMP and RAP will also be placed at the offices of the executing
agencies, district magistrate and contractor’s office. The executive summary of the EIA and RAP will also be
translated into local language and placed in the office of the Gram Panchayat of the affected villages.
Project Monitoring& Training: NMCG, through the respective SMCGs monitors all the approved
investments under the Namami Gange program to ensure conformity to the requirements of the ESMF.
The training program for SMCG, EA and various relevant stakeholders has been envisaged in ESMF,
includes an orientation program on the ESMF, Project Management, Engineering and Public Health.
Module has been given in annexure of the main report.

The implementation arrangements for the NMCG program are summarized below

                                  National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)




     SMCG,                 SMCG,               SMCG,                                   DoUD&H, Govt.
                                                                     SMCG,
  Govt. of Uttar          Govt. of           Govt. of West                              of Jharkhand
                                                                   Govt. of Bihar
    Pradesh             Uttarakhand            Bengal                                  (Nodal Agency)




       State Level        State Level           State Level          State Level          State Level
           EAs                EAs                   EAs                  EAs                  EAs

1.15      INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT & MECHANISM OF ESMF &AUDIT
          IMPLEMENTATION

At the NMCG as well at the 5 SMCG levels, one officer for Environmental Safeguard and once officer for
Social safeguard are appointed for managing social and environmental issues. These officers assist the EAs
in implementation of ESMF provisions. In the EA, an officer each are designated as social and environment
officer who are responsible for the implementation of ESMF tasks at the field level with the assistance and
participation of the local self-government.
Further in each of the sub-projects level, each of the contracting agencies also deploy their own
Environment and Health and Safety officer to implement the ESAMP at site.

1.16      CONSULTATION FUNCTIONARIES AS PER AUDIT FINDINGS

As per part of Implementation, monitoring and reporting arrangement of ESMF, an independent
Environmental and Social audit was conducted by third party in 2018. The audit was conducted as per the
                                                     9
    ESMF guidelines. In Audit report, it is reported that key government agencies such as state nodal agencies,
    Districts implementing units, have been consulted at the various levels to obtain their consent on the ESMF
    in general and specially on the land acquisition process and resettlement framework. ESA document
    prepared as per ESMF framework, have incorporated Stakeholder and public consultation at various stages
    at the local, regional and district levels, community and the relevant stakeholders (SMCG, EA, other
    departments irrigation department, forest department etc). Specific attention has been paid to Project
    Affected Persons, habitations or livelihoods will be directly impacted by the proposed sub-project,
    shopkeepers, Students etc. The mandate for conducting the audit was as per annexure IV of this report.
    The Audit was conducted in all the five basin states to verify/ witness the corrective action taken by the
    SMCG/ nodal agencies in addressing the Non-compliance identified during the Environmental and Social
    Audit.

    Present Functionality of Grievance Redressal Mechanism: At NMCG GRM officers are designated to
    address all queries registered in the NMCG portal. The GRM officer is supported by one social expert who
    coordinates with all the SMCGs. At SMCG level, reporting of grievances are being monitored by
    environmental and social experts. The details are mentioned in the report.

    Budget for implementing ESMF: As per finding of Audit conducted in year 2018 for 30 STPS & Sewerage
    schemes implemented in five basin states i.e. Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal,
    majorly budget for ESAMP has been considered as ranges from 0.5% to 1% of the total project cost, while
    Communication and Public Outreach, GAAP expected as 0.1% to 1% of the basic Capital Cost of the project.

                                            Table-1: Budget for implementing ESMF
                                                                                           Total Cost                    Source
                                                                  Unit Cost                                              of
S.No     Item                                            Unit                                                            financing
                                                                  Rupee        US$         Rupee          US$
         Preparation of specific ESIA/ESDDR for                                            20900000       298571
1                                                        38       550000       7857
         Ganga-1
         Preparation of ESIA and ESDDR for Ganga-                                          18510000       264429
2                                                        30       617000       8814                                      World
         2
                                                                                                                         Bank
3        Capacity Building##                             5        10000000     142857      50000000       714285
4        Implementation of specific ESMP*/RAP            68       10000000     142857      680000000      9714285
5        Annual ESMF Auditing#                           10       7000000      100000      70000000       1000000
         Total                                                                             839410000      11991570
         Total (Say)                                                                       850 Million    12.5 Million
         *This include cost of implementation of ESAMP/RAP including land purchase cost on an average
         # Annual ESMF audit cost for 10 years starting from 2018 till 2028
        ## The capacity building cost is lumpsum for training and other purposes for 5 basin states SPMG and NMCG




                                                                 10
