Namami Gange 1. On 24th March 2023, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi, laid the foundation stone of 3.45 KM Interception & Diversion and 55 MLD STP projects worth ₹ 308.09 crore for Assi-BHU Area (Phase II), Varanasi. 2. The project “Treatment of Assi Drain via Advanced Oxidation Process” was sanctioned by NMCG amounting to Rs. 40 crores. The work has commenced and is likely to be completed by 31st January 2024.    3. The launch of The Global River Cities Alliance (GRCA) was done on 10th December 2023at The United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP28) at the Conference of Parties (CoP28) in Dubai with 9 countries and 2 international cities. The GRCA, led by the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) is a unique alliance covering 275+ global river cities in 11 countries, international funding agencies and knowledge management partners and is the first of its kind in the world. The launch of GRCA signifies a momentous step in global efforts toward river conservation and sustainable water management. 4. NMCG participated in the second UN Water Conference 2023 which was held from 22nd to 24th March 2023. During the conference, Union Minister of Jal Shakti, Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, delivered the keynote address at a panel discussion on ‘Namami Gange - an integrated and holistic approach towards conservation and rejuvenation of River Ganga and its ecosystem’ on 23rd March 2023 at New York, U.S.A. Director General, NMCG, Shri G. Asok Kumar, gave an overview of the Namami Gange Program and expressed about Namami Gange Programme, one of India's Flagship programme, which has since evolved into one of the flagship programmes of the world. 5. Training on “Safety Training for STPs for the prevention of hazards-under the guidelines of OSHA: Till date, NMCG has organized four training session on OSHA-2020, at Namami Gange office. The training was held under the Chairmanship of DG, NMCG on 19th October 2023 and 9th November 2023 on different safety related themes. It aimed to address the safety, health, and working conditions of the workers, staff, contractors, masons, etc. working at the project site.  More than 250 participants were present in this including officers from NMCG, SPMGs, Executing Agencies, Contractors, etc. 6. Ghats and Crematoria under people river connect: During the year 2023, 11 Ghats and 1 Crematorium was sanctioned at a cost of 82.63 Cr. and 6 Ghats and 5 Crematoria are completed with the cost of 45.17 Cr.  7. On 13th and 14th February 2023, National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) in collaboration with National Institute of Urban Affairs organized “Driving Holistic Action for Urban Rivers” (DHARA 2023) in Pune, Maharashtra. Hon'ble Minister of Jal Shakti inaugurated the Conference, which was attended by over 51 Municipal Commissioners/Additional Commissioners of member cities of the River Cities Alliance. The two-day Conference had more than 300 participants and DG, NMCG, delivered the keynote address in the Conference. 8. Hon’ble Jal Shakti Minister, Uttar Pradesh, inaugurated the newly constructed Feacal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) of 10 KLD capacity by NMCG in Municipality Chunar, Mirzapur on 21st March, 2023. 9. On 12th April 2023 NMCG organized “Namami Gange: Universities Connect” event. Hon’ble Union Minister, Jal Shakti, presided over the function, where Memorandums of Understanding (MoU) were signed between NMCG and Chancellors /Vice-Chancellors of 49 universities to foster awareness among the youth on water conservation and river rejuvenation. These MoUs strive to bring the student communities to the forefront of the mass movement for creating a sustainable ecosystem of our rivers.  10. NMCG in association with the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) organized a national-level seminar on ‘Millets for LiFE (Lifestyle for Environment) on the topic ‘Developing Climate Resilient Local Communities in the Ganga Basin’ on 24th January 2023. Also, a remarkable campaign was conducted under this from April to June 2023. Throughout the campaign, a remarkable participation of over 23,000 individuals joined across 41 districts in seven Ganga River Basin States, namely Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Bihar, Jharkhand, and West Bengal. 11. NMCG in association with ICAR-CIFRI organized the "National River Ranching Programme 2023" of Indian Major Carps (IMC) and Mahseer at various locations in Uttrakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Bihar and Jharkhand in river Ganga from 2nd April 2023 to 31st May 2023. Again on 16th June 2023, the release of 10,000 (Ten thousand) Mahseer fish fingerlings was done into the Ganga river at Devprayag for conservation and restoration of fishes of the Ganga river. NMCG also organized a ranching programme on 1st July 2023 at Ram Ghat, Ballia, Uttar Pradesh.A total of 93 lakhs of Indian Major Carp (IMC) fingerlings have been ranched in the Ganga since 2017 to conserve fish biodiversity, and prey base for river Dolphins and ensure the livelihood of fishers in the Ganga basin. 12. Hon’ble Minister of Jal Shakti launched the Monitoring Centre “PRAYAG” Platform for Real-time Analysis of Yamuna and Ganga & their Tributaries on 20th April 2023. PRAYAG is a real-time monitoring center for planning and monitoring projects, river water quality, etc. through various online dashboards.  13. During July, 2023, NMCG launched a ‘Ganga Bhog – Gangotri Se Ganga Sagar Tak’ to promote livelihoodgeneration awareness among locals centred on the ‘5 Ms’: maa (mother), mandir (temple), mitti (land), Mahila (women) and mota-anaj (millets). It is another attempt under Arth Ganga initiative to involve people in connecting faith and livelihood. 14. The 7th edition of Ganga Utsav 2023 was organized by NMCG in New Delhi on 4th November 2023 and was inaugurated by the Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, in the presence of Special Secretary and DG, NMCG. As a part of the celebration, a diverse range of activities were organized at approximately over 90 locations across the Ganga Basin States to foster a deeper connection between people and rivers, as well as to raise awareness about river rejuvenation.  15. NMCG in association with National Book Trust flagged off the 2nd Edition of Ganga PustakParikarma on 4th November 2023. This 3-month long journey of the PustakParikarma was commenced on 7th November 2023 from Gangotri. The Parikarma would traverse through various major cities and towns on the banks of river Ganga including- Uttarkashi, Rishikesh, Haridwar, Bijnore, Meerut, Aligarh, Farrukkhabad, Kanpur, Prayagraj, Mirzapur, Varanasi, Chhapra, Patna, Begusarai, Sultanganj, Bhagalpur, Sahibganj, Baharampur, Kolkata and Haldia-before concluding on 11th January 2024 at Ganga Sagar 16. NMCG also organized the 8th Edition of the India Water Impact Summit (IWIS) 2023 from 22nd - 24th November 2023 in collaboration with Center for Ganga River Basin Management and Studies (cGanga). The summit carried the theme ‘Development vis-à-vis Land, Water and Rivers,' aimed at uniting scientific experts, stakeholders, and government representatives to address dynamic challenges and opportunities in India's water sector. 17. During the World Water Congress 2023, held from 10th to 14th December 2023 in Kigali, Rwanda, NMCG received special recognition as a "Climate Smart Utility" within the framework defined by the International Water Association (IWA). The recognition is bestowed under IWA's Climate Smart Utilities Initiative—Recognition Program. Out of a total of 35 applications received, NMCG was the only applicant to receive special recognition for outstanding climate-smart actions in collaboration with utilities in the Ganges basin. 18. To promote the cleanliness of the Ganga River at the district level, a total of 139 District Ganga Committees (DGC) have been constituted under the chairmanship of District Magistrates. The performance is monitored by the ‘Digital Dashboard for District Ganga Committees (DGCs) Performance Monitoring System’ (GDPMS). District Ganga Committees conducted 4M (Monthly, Mandated, Minuted, and Monitored) meetings, which were inaugurated by the Honorable Minister of Jal Shakti. More than 2,070 DGC meetings have been conducted till date. 19. Various interventions taken up during 2023under the Arth Ganga Initiative are as follows:  On 28th and 29th April 2023, NMCG in association with Sahakar Bharti organized a meeting for the formation of Sahakar Ganga Gram at Sahibganj and Bhagalpur. The meeting is aimed to bring together all Arth Ganga-related initiatives to ensure convergence such as Jalaj, Natural Farming, Ghat peHaat, sludge to fertilizer, marketing of agricultural and handicraft produce, tourism, etc. The meeting was attended bySahakarBharati District Coordinators of 12 Ganga districts and over 1000 farmers.  Awareness and Aarti Workshop:  NMCG has organized 3 Days "Awareness and Aarti Workshop” at ParmarthNiketan from 16th -18th June 2023 with a batch of 30 participants.  These trainings result in regular aartis at the Ghats which is a powerful mode of creating an economic bridge between people and rivers with strong faith hence, supporting the concept of Jan- Ganga.  MahaAarti of River Yamuna:  On 19th February, 2023, DG, NMCG performed the MahaAarti of River Yamuna in the presence of Yamuna ParivarParishad and ParmarthNiketan members. DG, NMCG addressed the event and shared the efforts undertaken to clean River Yamuna.  The Implementation of JALAJ Livelihood Model is in progress at 40 locations which is to be replicated at 75 locations by Wildlife Institute of India WII, Dehradun. On 17th September 2023, a JALAJ Awareness and Marketing (JAM) Center started functioning at Dilli-Haat. This is a very unique information dissemination and livelihood opportunities initiative under Arth -Ganga. Products made by Women SHG under JALAL and the other NGOs of Ganga Basin are being sold by an Apex Jalaj SHG (JALAJ-NAULA) in a stall leased out by NMCG. Namami Gange also set up an outlet of Jalaj Awareness and Marketing (JAM) Center at ‘TV9 Festival of India’ New Delhi for the sale of local products from the Ganga basin from 20th to 24th October, 2023. 22. Celebration of Ganga Dussehra 2023: On the occasion of Ganga Dussehra, NMCG, in collaboration with the District Ganga Committee and volunteer NGOs, organised several events along the Ganga River from Uttarakhand to West Bengal on May 30, 2023. These include - an awareness meeting, Ganga Cleanliness rally, Ganga Cleanliness pledge,  MissionLiFE pledge, and  Ganga Aarti. 23. Celebration of International Day of Yoga:  On the occasion of the International Day of Yoga, the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) organized ‘Ghat Par Yoga’ at BSF Camp, Zero Pushta, Sonia Vihar in Delhi on the bank of River Yamuna on 21st June 2023. Over 600 people participated in the event including a group of NGOs, Delhi Jal Board (DJB), Border Security Force (BSF), Ganga Task Force (GTF), volunteers from Ganga VicharManch, students and children. 24. Following are the various studies conducted under the Namami Gange Programme in the year 2023:  Proposal to document Cultural Heritage along river Ganga from Gaumukh to Ganga Sagar (Bay of Bengal) By INTACH.  Selection guidelines for constructed wetland systems for treatment of sewage in India under Namami Gange Programme.  A detail Study to Understand the Non Putrefying Property of River Ganga in both Water and Sediment.  Project Towards a policy for Riverine Islands in the Ganga River under Namami Gange Programme.  High Resolution Climate Scenarios for Basin-Scale Water Resource Management Applications  Data Generation for Aquifer Mapping with Focus on Paleo Channels in parts of Ganga Yamuna Doab in Kaushambi – Kanpur Stretch  Fluvial geomorphology mapping of Hindon River basin. 25. Ganga Sustainability Run - On 5th November 2023, DG, NMCG inaugurated the Ganga Sustainability Run at Rishikesh, organized by Vivekananda Youth Connect Foundation along with ParmarthNiketan, Rishikesh to an effort to create awareness of GANGA’s ecosystem.  26. Launch of District Ganga Plans: On 27th September 2023, the Model District Ganga plans was launched for Udham Singh Nagar, Shahjahanpur, Moradabad and Bareilly prepared by DGC under the guidance of GIZ and WWF. This is for the first time such an exercise to prepare a detailed plan for the rejuvenation of river with River Basin Management plan approach was done with the involvement of all stake holders in the district, under the leadership of the DMs. 27. Meeting with World Bank Executive Directors Team: On 5th August 2023, DG, NMCG, along with senior NMCG officials, attended a meeting held with the World Bank Group's Executive Directors at Agra during the study visit to India to understand the transformational impact of World Bank projects in the country. During the meeting, DG, NMCG presented pioneering strategies for the mission, spotlighting the integrated management of the Ganga River Basin. 28. Stockholm World Water Week 2023: National Mission for Clean Ganga officials online participated in World Water Week 2023 a prominent global event organized by the Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI) and brought together experts, policymakers, researchers, practitioners, and stakeholders from around the world to discuss and address various water-related challenges held from August 20 to 24, 2023. NMCG organized virtual sessions on various topics. 29. Setting up of River Basin Management(RBM):Under Namami Gange Programme, a comprehensive River Basin Management Plan for River Ganga has been prepared by the consortium of seven Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs). The Plan was prepared with the objectives of taking comprehensive measures for restoration of the wholesomeness of the Ganga ecosystem and improvement of its ecological health. Further, a river basin management plan for one of major tributary of river Ganga that is River Ramganga and model District Ganga Plans for four districts in Ramganga basin have also been developed.  30. Reuse of Treated Water: The National Framework for Safe Reuse of Treated Water was released on 5th January 2023 during 1st All India Annual State Ministers Conference on Water at Bhopal. 